# Final Project for CS391X1, Summer I, 2026

This final project consists of 1000 points:

1. Project report: 250 points
2. Project presentation: 250 points
3. Your LAMBDA Compiler: 500 points

## The LAMBDA programming language

The datatype for the LAMBDA programming language,
which has not changed since Week 4, is given as follows.
Note that a completed LAMBDA compiler should handle ALL
the langugage constructs listed in this datatype:

```
datatype dexp =
//
| DEint of sint
| DEbtf of bool
| DEstr of strn
//
| DEvar of dvar
| DElam of
( dvar, dexp(*body*))
| DEapp of
( dexp(*fun*), dexp(*arg*))
//
| DEopr of (strn, list(dexp))
//
| DEfst of (dexp)
| DEsnd of (dexp)
| DEtup of (dexp, dexp)
//
| DEif0 of
( dexp(*test*)
, dexp(*then*), dexp(*else*))
//
| DEfix of
( dvar(*fun*)
, dvar(*arg*), dexp(*body*))
//
| DElet of
( dvar(*x*)
, dexp(*def*), dexp(*scope*))
//
| DElist_nil of ()
| DElist_cons of (dexp, dexp)
//
| DElazy of dexp
| DEstcn_nil of ()
| DEstcn_cons of (dexp, dexp)
//
| DEarry_size$val of (dexp(*size*), dexp(*val*))
| DEarry_size$fun of (dexp(*size*), dexp(*fun*))
//
| DEanno of (dexp, styp(*anno*))
//
| DElam1 of
  (dvar(*x*), styp, dexp(*body*))
| DEfix1 of
  (dvar(*f*), dvar(*x*), styp(*arg*), styp(*res*), dexp(*body*))
//
```

## Five Expected Compiler Components

I expect to see the following 5 (five) components in your
compiler:

1. A closure-based interpreter (dexp_eval000) LAMBDA.
  (Note that there is no need for implementing a substitution-based
  interpreter for LAMBDA).

2. An inference-based type-checker (dexp_oftp000) for LAMBDA.
  Note that the following interface is required this time:
  ```
  type stypopt = None|styp
  def dexp_oftp000(dex: dexp) -> stypopt: ...
  ```
  In other words, dexp_oftp000 should not abort when applied to
  an ill-typed dexp; it should return None instead.

3. A translation function (dexp_comp000) from LAMBDA to some form of
  representation of computations (where a computation consists of a
  sequence of instructions plus a temporary register for storing the
  result of the computation)

4. An emitter function (dcmp_emit000) that emits JavaScript code for
  the computations generated by dexp_comp000. Note that JavaScript is
  the TARGET language here. If you have to use Python instead of JS,
  I will give you at most 50% of the points assigned to this component.

5. Various tests covering ALL the language constructs of LAMBDA.
  In addtion, I expect to see some "large" LAMBDA programs tested:
  - 5.1. The eight-queen puzzle
  - 5.2. The Eratosthenes's sieve (for a lazy stream of primes)
  - 5.3. Some code using the factorial function implemented in Church's
     pure lambda-calculus (Quiz04) to produce the factorial of 5. This
     one is designed to test your compiler's handling of higher-order
     functions

## Guidelines for the Project Report

1. Give a brief introduction on (pure) lambda-calculus
  - 1.1. What is alpha-equivalance?
  - 1.2. What is substitution? what is "capturing"?
  - 1.3. What is beta-redex? what is the contractum of a beta-redex
  - 1.4. What is call-by-name? what is call-by-value

2. Give a brief introduction on the LAMBDA programming language
  - 2.1. Just explain the meaning of each of the language constructs

3. Give a brief introduction on the simple type syste of LAMBDA
  - 3.1. Just explain the typing rule for each of the language constructs

4. Explain the implementation of dexp_oftp000 (and dexp_oftpctx)
5. Explain the implementation of dexp_comp000 (and dexp_compenv)
6. Explain how your emitter works (for emitting JavaScript code).

7. Explain how your test cases work. In particular, I would like to
  know some details on the factorial function implemented in Church's
  pure lambda-calculus (Quiz04). What is the type of this function?
  How do you manage to use it to project the factorial of 5 (that is,
  120).

8. (Optional) Using AI-assisted programming is encouraged as long as
  you are able to explain how your submitted code works.

  If you use AI to generate (some) of submitted code, please let me
  know how you actually do it. Do you use Codex or Claude? How much
  code are you able to generate for this project? Do you ever need to
  fix any generated code?

## Guidelines for the Project Presentation

0. Your presentation should not go over 20 minutes!

1. Make some slides based on your project report. Please avoid crowding
  your slides with too much text.

2. Please do not read your slides. Instead, please elaborate on the points
  mentioned on each slide.
